docs: add usage guide for lvmo [skip ci] (#100)
red-hat-storage/lvm-operator: doc/user-guide/usage.md

## Deploying LVMCluster CR

This guide assumes you followed steps in [Readme][repo-readme] and LVM operator
(hereafter LVMO) is running in your cluster.

Below are the available disks in our test kubernetes cluster node and there are
no existing LVM Physical Volumes, Volume Groups and Logical Volumes

``` console
sh-4.4# lsblk
NAME    MAJ:MIN RM   SIZE RO TYPE MOUNTPOINT
sdb       8:16   0 893.8G  0 disk
|-sdb1    8:17   0     1M  0 part
|-sdb2    8:18   0   127M  0 part
|-sdb3    8:19   0   384M  0 part /boot
`-sdb4    8:20   0 893.3G  0 part /sysroot
sr0      11:0    1   987M  0 rom
nvme0n1 259:0    0   1.5T  0 disk
nvme1n1 259:1    0   1.5T  0 disk
nvme2n1 259:2    0   1.5T  0 disk
sh-4.4# pvs
sh-4.4# vgs
sh-4.4# lvs
```

> Here LVMO is installed in `lvm-operator-system` namespace via `make deploy`

Reviewer: Instead of `make` commands, upstream users generally appreciate either `kubectl` or `helm` commands for install. The `make` is just a black box to them. `make` works well during development, just not for production.

Author: - ack, this'll be a change in repo readme, you might want to have a look at #99  as well 🤔 
- the change more or less translates to push an image to the registry on every release and update yaml manifest for the same like `IMG=<pushed-image> make deploy > examples/lvmo.yaml`, at best `kubectl -f`, `helm` is a stretch atm
- will take a note of it and update the instructions when we push image to upstream accessible registry

Author: - Will be taken up in a separate PR

  created, including storage class for ready consumption of Persistent Volumes
  based on Topolvm

- Wait for all the pods to be in `READY` state
- `topolvm-controller` and `topolvm-node` will be in `init` stage for a while
  awaiting creation of certs and creation of volume groups by `vg-manager`
  respectively

``` console
kubectl get pods
NAME                                  READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE
controller-manager-8bf864c85-8zjlp    3/3     Running   0          31m
topolvm-controller-694bc98b87-x6dxn   4/4     Running   0          10m
topolvm-node-pbcth                    4/4     Running   0          10m
vg-manager-f979f                      1/1     Running   0          10m
```
When all pods are ready, the LVM physical volumes and volume groups should be
created on the host.

``` console
sh-4.4# pvs
  PV           VG  Fmt  Attr PSize  PFree 
  /dev/nvme0n1 vg1 lvm2 a--  <1.46t <1.46t
  /dev/nvme1n1 vg1 lvm2 a--  <1.46t <1.46t
  /dev/nvme2n1 vg1 lvm2 a--  <1.46t <1.46t
sh-4.4# vgs
  VG  #PV #LV #SN Attr   VSize  VFree 
  vg1   3   0   0 wz--n- <4.37t <4.37t
```

Confirm that the following resources have been created on the cluster:

> - When LVMCluster CR is deployed which contains details of all volume groups that

Reviewer: Is there a design doc that explains why the LVMCluster CR embeds the LVMVolumeGroup CRs? This goes against K8s patterns, but is a bigger discussion for the team outside this PR...

Author: - we only have bits and pieces in dev-guide
- yes, it indeed need more discussion and at the same time current implementation provides a feasibility to make LVMVolumGroups CR as independent unit if need may arise

  needs to be created across multiple nodes, two supporting Custom Resources
  are created by LVMO
- LVMVolumeGroup: CR created and managed by LVMO which tracks individual volume
  groups across multiple nodes

> ``` json

Reviewer: IMO yaml is easier to read than json

Author: - ack, will update the listing

# kubectl get lvmvolumegroup test -ojson
{
    "apiVersion": "lvm.topolvm.io/v1alpha1",
    "kind": "LVMVolumeGroup",
    "metadata": {
        "creationTimestamp": "2022-02-02T05:16:42Z",
        "generation": 1,

>         "name": "test",

Reviewer 2: The name here should be vg1 based on the LVMCluster CR.

    "metadata": {
        "creationTimestamp": "2022-02-02T05:17:59Z",
        "generation": 1,
        "name": "kube-node",
        "namespace": "lvm-operator-system",
        "resourceVersion": "17242882",
        "uid": "292de9bb-3a9b-4ee8-946a-9b587986dafd"
    },
    "spec": {
        "nodeStatus": [
            {
                "devices": [
                    "/dev/nvme0n1",
                    "/dev/nvme1n1",
                    "/dev/nvme2n1"
                ],
                "name": "test",
                "status": "Ready"
            }
        ]
    }
}
```
- A storage class which matches names (prefixed with `topolvm-`) of
  deviceClasses in LVMCluster CR are created as below
``` console
# kubectl get storageclass
NAME          PROVISIONER          RECLAIMPOLICY   VOLUMEBINDINGMODE      ALLOWVOLUMEEXPANSION   AGE
topolvm-vg1   topolvm.cybozu.com   Delete          WaitForFirstConsumer   true                   31m
```

Note:
- Reconciling multiple LVMCluster CRs by LVMO is not supported
- Custom resources LVMVolumeGroup and LVMVolumeGroupNodeStatus are managed by
  LVMO and users should not edit them.

## Deploying PVC and App Pod

> - A successful reconciliation of LVMCluster CR will setup all the underlying

Reviewer: Can the user see some status on the CR to know it's ready? I'd recommend helping them see the status instead of talking about the reconcile. In my experience, users just don't generally understand what reconcile means.

Author: - ack, maybe I can provide a listing of LVMCluster CR after successful reconciliation for easy ref here

  resources needed to be able to create a PVC and use it in app pod
- Create a PVC using the StorageClass created for the deviceClass. The PVC will
  not be bound until a pod claims the storage as the volume binding mode is set
  to WaitForFirstConsumer.
```yaml
cat <<EOF | kubectl apply -f -
apiVersion: v1
kind: PersistentVolumeClaim
metadata:
  name: lvm-file-pvc
spec:
  volumeMode: Filesystem
  accessModes:
    - ReadWriteOnce
  resources:
    requests:
      storage: 5Gi
  storageClassName: topolvm-vg1
EOF
```
``` console
kubectl get pvc
NAME           STATUS    VOLUME   CAPACITY   ACCESS MODES   STORAGECLASS   AGE
lvm-file-pvc   Pending                                      topolvm-vg1    12s
```

> - In a multi node setup this volume binding is used to take scheduling

Reviewer: Which "volume binding" is this referring to? I don't see how the scheduler prefers nodes with highest available storage space.

Author: - volume binding is just mentioned in previous bullet point, i.e, WaitForFirstConsumer

> I don't see how the scheduler prefers nodes with highest available storage space
- IMHO, this detail isn't needed in user guide
- or at the least I can link to the k8s blog about csistorage capacity tracking then, not sure though

(hereafter LVMO) is running in your cluster.

Below are the available disks in our test kubernetes cluster node and there are
no existing LVM Physical Volumes, Volume Groups and Logical Volumes

``` console
sh-4.4# lsblk
NAME    MAJ:MIN RM   SIZE RO TYPE MOUNTPOINT
sdb       8:16   0 893.8G  0 disk
|-sdb1    8:17   0     1M  0 part
|-sdb2    8:18   0   127M  0 part
|-sdb3    8:19   0   384M  0 part /boot
`-sdb4    8:20   0 893.3G  0 part /sysroot
sr0      11:0    1   987M  0 rom
nvme0n1 259:0    0   1.5T  0 disk
nvme1n1 259:1    0   1.5T  0 disk
nvme2n1 259:2    0   1.5T  0 disk
sh-4.4# pvs
sh-4.4# vgs
sh-4.4# lvs
```

Here LVMO is installed in `lvm-operator-system` namespace via `make deploy`
target and operations will not change if LVMO is installed in any other namespaces.

``` console
kubectl get pods
NAME                                 READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE
controller-manager-8bf864c85-8zjlp   3/3     Running   0          96s
```

After all containers in above listing is in `READY` state we can proceed with
deploying LVMCluster CR

``` yaml
cat <<EOF | kubectl apply -f -
apiVersion: lvm.topolvm.io/v1alpha1
kind: LVMCluster
metadata:
  name: lvmcluster-sample

>   # replace the namespace to suit your installation

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  # set the namespace to the operator namespace
```

  needs to be created across multiple nodes, two supporting Custom Resources
  are created by LVMO
- LVMVolumeGroup: CR created and managed by LVMO which tracks individual volume
  groups across multiple nodes
``` yaml
# kubectl get lvmvolumegroup vg1 -oyaml
apiVersion: lvm.topolvm.io/v1alpha1
kind: LVMVolumeGroup
metadata:
  creationTimestamp: "2022-02-02T05:16:42Z"
  generation: 1
  name: vg1
  namespace: lvm-operator-system
  resourceVersion: "17242461"
  uid: 88e8ad7d-1544-41fb-9a8e-12b1a66ab157
spec: {}
```
- LVMVolumeGroupNodeStatus: CR created and managed by VG Manager which tracks
  node status corresponding to multiple volume groups
``` yaml
# kubectl get lvmvolumegroupnodestatuses.lvm.topolvm.io kube-node -oyaml
apiVersion: lvm.topolvm.io/v1alpha1
kind: LVMVolumeGroupNodeStatus
metadata:
  creationTimestamp: "2022-02-02T05:17:59Z"
  generation: 1
  name: kube-node
  namespace: lvm-operator-system
  resourceVersion: "17242882"
  uid: 292de9bb-3a9b-4ee8-946a-9b587986dafd
spec:
  nodeStatus:
    - devices:
        - /dev/nvme0n1
        - /dev/nvme1n1
        - /dev/nvme2n1
      name: vg1
      status: Ready
```

> - A storage class which matches names (prefixed with `topolvm-`) of

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- A storage class called  `topolvm-`<deviceclassname> will be created.
```

lvm-file-pvc    Bound    pvc-04a4f5f7-8665-4008-818a-490503c859f5   5Gi        RWO            topolvm-vg1    13m
```

### Monitoring and Metrics

- LVMO currently surfaces only Topolvm metrics and those can be viewed either
  from UI or port-forwarding the service
- On Openshift clusters, set the label "openshift.io/cluster-monitoring" on the
  namespace the LVMO is running in.
``` console
kubectl patch namespace/lvm-operator-system -p '{"metadata": {"labels": {"openshift.io/cluster-monitoring": "true"}}}'
```
``` console
# port-forward service in one terminal
kubectl port-forward svc/topolvm-node-metrics :8080
Forwarding from 127.0.0.1:41685 -> 8080
Forwarding from [::1]:41685 -> 8080
...
...

# in another terminal view the metrics at above port in localhost
curl -s 127.0.0.1:41685/metrics | grep -Ei 'topolvm_volumegroup_.*?_bytes\{'
topolvm_volumegroup_available_bytes{device_class="vg1",node="kube-node"} 4.790222323712e+12
topolvm_volumegroup_size_bytes{device_class="vg1",node="kube-node"} 4.800959741952e+12
```

## Cleanup

- Feature to auto cleanup volume groups after removing LVMCluster CR is coming
  soon

> - Until then, please do the following after deleting the LVMCluster CR to
>   cleanup the resources created by the operator
> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Until then, please perform the following steps to
  cleanup the resources created by the operator

```

kubectl delete pod app-file app-block
pod "app-file" deleted
pod "app-block" deleted

# delete PVCs which were used by above App pods
kubectl delete pvc lvm-file-pvc lvm-block-pvc
persistentvolumeclaim "lvm-file-pvc" deleted
persistentvolumeclaim "lvm-block-pvc" deleted
```
2. Make sure there are no `logicalvolumes` CRs which were created by topolvm
``` console
kubectl get logicalvolumes.topolvm.cybozu.com 
No resources found
```
3. Take a json dump of LVMCluster CR contents. It has the list of VGs and PVs
  created on the nodes.
``` console
kubectl get lvmclusters.lvm.topolvm.io -ojson > /tmp/lvmcr.json
```
4. Either parse contents from above json file via jq or store status of the CR
``` console
kubectl get lvmclusters.lvm.topolvm.io -ojsonpath='{.items[*].status.deviceClassStatuses[*]}' | python3 -mjson.tool
```
``` json
{
    "name": "vg1",
    "nodeStatus": [
        {
            "devices": [
                "/dev/nvme0n1",
                "/dev/nvme1n1",
                "/dev/nvme2n1"
            ],
            "node": "kube-node",
            "status": "Ready"
        }
    ]
}
```
5. Remove LVMCluster CR and wait for deletion of all resources in the namespace

>    except operator (contorller-manager pod)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   except the operator (controller-manager pod)
```

``` console
kubectl delete lvmclusters.lvm.topolvm.io lvmcluster-sample
lvmcluster.lvm.topolvm.io "lvmcluster-sample" deleted

kubectl get po
NAME                                 READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE
controller-manager-8bf864c85-8zjlp   3/3     Running   0          125m
```
6. Login to the node and remove the LVM volume groups and physical volumes
``` console
sh-4.4# vgremove vg1 --nolock
  WARNING: File locking is disabled.
  Volume group "vg1" successfully removed
sh-4.4# pvremove  /dev/nvme0n1 /dev/nvme1n1 /dev/nvme2n1 --nolock
  WARNING: File locking is disabled.
  Labels on physical volume "/dev/nvme0n1" successfully wiped.
  Labels on physical volume "/dev/nvme1n1" successfully wiped.
  Labels on physical volume "/dev/nvme2n1" successfully wiped.
```
7. Remove the lvmd.yaml config file from the node
``` console
sh-4.4# rm /etc/topolvm/lvmd.yaml 
```
Note:
- Removal of volume groups, physical volumes and lvm config file is necessary
  during cleanup or else LVMO fails to deploy Topolvm in next iteration.

> ## Undeploying LVMO

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Uninstalling LVMO
```
